if you're new to the channel you may not
know that I am a vegan however I am a
very pragmatic very nihilistic vegan I
don't believe in most of the things that
most of my fellow Feakins believe so for
example I don't believe that animals
have a soul I don't believe in an
afterlife I don't believe in
reincarnation I don't believe in karma
neither the Buddhist idea of karma or
the Hindu idea of karma nevertheless I'm
a vegan veganism I think it's the right
thing to do in the same way I do make
ethical decisions as a consumer but I do
not believe in ethical consumerism as
the title of this video suggests you I
regard ethical consumerism as a myth
although it is a myth constructed out of
good intentions and people trying to
rationalize even good things they're
doing which is finite so I don't really
anything that's the practice of ethical
consumerism but let's talk a little bit
about the theory and the way in which it
can be misleading or the way in which
people kind of delude themselves with
their belief in this theory the pricing
mechanism in economics is a way of
sharing information when the price of
something goes up it can indicate
scarcity it can actually indicate
scarcity of many different kinds you get
into some really surreal questions in
economics when you look at the pricing
of heart surgery there was a time in the
United States of America when you know
performing routine heart surgery surgery
for heart attacks was a new development
in medical science when there were very
few people who had been trained to
perform this operation and when it was
considered risky of course there still
is some risk then over time partly just
because of the proliferation of heart
surgeons more and more people had this
skill believe it or not their supply and
demand and the price the price of having
a heart attack
went to hunting down the price of
actually paying for heart surgery went
down now the United States of America is
one of the only countries in the world
that has free-market principles with
heart surgery and on a huge scale - now
- know what you can learn from looking
at the price of heart surgery in
Cambodia or something this is a very
very strange area
so but in that case I mean you say the
scarcity has to do with the skilled
staff who can take it out the reason why
the price is high is also things like
fear whether you think you're gonna live
or you're gonna die if you buy this
product that can be an issue with other
products too
the price communicates information okay
when people purchase something when they
pay the price
they are also communicating something
through the market right like hey I
could have chosen the cheapest product
available but instead you chose
something more expensive for this reason
or that reason okay and when you refuse
to buy something whether you engage in a
boycott or you refuse to produce
something for some other reason you may
be sending a signal also you're sending
a signal that you don't want this low
quality product you want some that's
more expensive higher quality you may be
sending the signal that you don't want
to buy something that's made in China
you instead want to buy something that's
made in the United States of America or
something that's made in Europe you know
whatever um there were all these things
that are sent through the price
mechanism through the purchase mechanism
there is the sharing of information
through free market mechanisms however
it's very dangerous that people try to
talk themselves into believing that
they're sharing more information than
they really are sharing and that they're
communicating something through the
protests through the active purchase or
refusing their purchase that cannot
possibly be the single signal
communicated to the market so I have
known various women who would say to me
that they refuse to buy clothing from a
certain company because that company has
overly skinny models the models are too
slim that are advertising this clothing
right if you want to communicate to that
company that you are not buying their
product because you think the models are
emaciated you think the models look
anorexic or something you want them to
use fleshy or models in their
advertising okay you cannot communicate
that information through just refusing
to purchase the clothing made by that
brand
there's no way they're gonna be looking
at their accounts and they're gonna get
that signal okay now you can communicate
that message to other methods you could
write letters you could start a
letter-writing campaign you could start
collecting hundreds of signatures from
people you could organize a feminist
group there are ways you could
communicate to that company
hey we like your clothing we want to buy
your clothing but we refuse by it for
this for this reason but that's not
packaged into the signal the signal
there is not going to be specific and
it's not linked to that variable because
that company it's not in the modeling
business it's not even in the poster
making business it's not in the
advertising business
they're in the clothing manufacturing
business that's all of what they're
paying attention to when they look at
what sells and what doesn't the last
thing in their mind is oh the models are
too skinny you know they're going to be
looking at those products ago gee you
know last year this type of clothing
sold better and this year it sold worse
well maybe it's for this reason maybe so
that reason they're gonna be looking at
fashion and the climate they're gonna be
looking at a million factors and it's
not even going to occur to them all
right
now there I've used this example before
there was a bakery I used to go into
regularly I don't know a proud one in
five times or ten times in in in Canada
and you know I asked them look I need to
know which breads are vegan and which
ones aren't you know in the Western will
normally sell even if they don't mean
for them to be vegan a lot of bread is
vegan there's no reason for it to
contain dairy or eggs and my having that
conversation with the person repeatedly
again maybe five times really
communicating to them this is something
they need to get organized on it's
something they need to care about right
before they just didn't pay any
attention and they didn't know I'd go in
and ask and they'd say okay we got a
phone the Baker
we got a ad you know we because they
didn't know they didn't know some of
them they knew had milk powder or some
of them some of them an egg wash or
something some didn't and the woman said
to me you know the last time I want to
have this conversation said you know we
need to start a checklist and keep track
of which breads are freaking and which
ones are because we don't know and I'm
sorry she just recognized this is
something important if I had just walked
into the store looked at the bread
turned around and walked out if I had
just not bought read there
that doesn't communicate that signal
okay if I simply never walked into that
store at all I only walked into a vegan
baking store and only bought bread there
right so this question applies to other
ethical problems linked to veganism I
had one person ask me sincerely he we
were speaking through boys daddy was
like Skype you know and I could see him
and here's why she was not joking
she asked seriously should he refuse to
buy almonds because indirectly farmers
growing almonds are part and parcel of
the honey industry they employ bees
honey bees to pollinate the almond trees
so on and so forth I'm sorry if I miss
remember I believe that was example was
almonds and I pointed out to him I said
look when you refuse to buy meat when
people don't buy meat that does send a
signal okay but if the signal you want
to send is that you want to buy almonds
that are raised without bees being used
for pollination or maybe it's even more
specific maybe it's that you you you
you're okay with bees for pollination
but not for honey production you want
non exploitative use of pollinators or
something to make you know I don't know
there are alternatives to be based
pollination for those industries or if
that is the signal you want to spend
then it's like trying to influence the
fashion industry to stop using emaciated
models this is something so specific you
cannot possibly communicate that simply
through purchasing one product or
refusing to purchase another the
idealized outcome of people buying less
and less cow milk and buying more and
more soy milk oat milk oat milk is a big
story this year 2019 this is near 2020
but 2019 was the year of oat milk in
North America where the market exploded
for this you know there's a very simple
signal being sent through free market
mechanisms people want less cow milk
they want more soy milk oat milk
non-dairy alternatives okay so everyone
gets that that's clear but you can't
address the use of bees in not farming
not
agriculture this way you can't address
the use of animal by-products in
recycling car tires this way okay the
the creation of the rubbery mix that
goes into car tires the creation of the
the very strange mix of things that's in
tarmac in road resurfacing to my
knowledge again partly because it is so
cheap they use some materials that are
slaughterhouse byproducts you know that
are I think it's bone meal and gelatin
and stuff is churned up in some of these
processes I'm not an expert if that is
the issue you want to tackle again that
would probably involve legislation or
something there is no way you can
communicate that by refusing to drive on
a road you think you say oh I know that
when this road was resurfaced they use
bone meal or gel they used animal
by-products in in paving this road
whereas this other road it wasn't they
just you know the company didn't that's
not even an intentional choice obviously
which is for Rovers no oh no no I'm not
gonna buy these tires I'm gonna buy this
tire for this reason there is no way the
pricing mechanism or the boycott
mechanism could possibly communicate
that okay so ethical consumerism as a
movement there's a problem with
information both ways one problem is the
consumer communicating information to
the producer and the other frankly is
the ignorance of the consumer himself or
herself because people write in to me
all the time about Nike shoes every
single time I've addressed this I sent
the person links to Nikes ethical
commitments and the independent auditors
I sit you didn't even google this Nike
has one of the best records in the world
here look okay
Nike pioneered new methods of having
independent auditors come in and look at
you know human rights and quality of
life in their factories and those
reports are posted direct to the
internet Nike doesn't get to a sense of
them and when a factory is bad like
they're treating their workers too
poorly then they have a system where the
the factory gets a couple months to try
to improve conditions and they send
people back in to inspect it and if the
and improved it if they go past a point
then they end all cooperation with that
factory and they create a new factory or
seconder Nike was a world leader in this
and they're also a world leader in this
kind of transparency so there's a
problem with information going both ways
there's the delusion that you as a
consumer are communicating something
meaningful to the producer and there's
an even more dangerous ego trip that you
as a consumer know more than the
producer when you have never taken the
time to really do research into for
example factory conditions or into the
ecological consequences some of these
decisions people make there's actually a
lot for you to know if you really want
to engage in this religion of ethical
consumerism
I hear people all the time making very
lazy claims about how plastic is
destroying the world and if you just use
Socratic method for a few moments okay
so you're assuming there'd be less of a
negative consequence if that were made
of wood if that were made of steel
what's that were made of glass really
have you ever done the math have you
ever looked that up no it would be a lot
of work for you to know these things
know you can probably tell I've done
enough miscellaneous research in my life
that I'm at least aware of these factors
that actually very often plastic
packaging is ethically superior and
ecologically superior to the non plastic
alternatives really I'm aware that
sometimes a big corporation like Nike
has much higher ethical standards and
better conditions for workers in
factories than a small mom-and-pop
company that doesn't have any of this
auditing any of these ethical
commitments doesn't have any of any of
this track record history and they don't
of the budget even to to make these
efforts to improve human rights and
factories okay I'm aware of these
contradictions cuz I've done social
science research on a variety of things
but even still I am aware that I can't
know it all so my attitude even though
yes I am a vegan and in some ways I do
engage in ethical consumerism but I
don't believe in it because I think
there are dangerous delusions involved
both in terms of what information I am
communicating to the producer and in the
assumptions about what I know from and
about the producers as a consumer